docs: user onboarding, starting a new workspace, URL parameters (#2252)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/end-user-guide/pages/optional-parameters-for-the-urls-for-starting-a-new-workspace.adoc

| link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-theia[Che-Theia]
| `eclipse/che-theia/next`
| When using the `next` link:https://github.com/che-incubator/chectl/[chectl] channel, this IDE loads as a default in a new workspace without this URL parameter.
endif::[]

ifeval::["{project-context}" == "crw"]
| link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-theia[Che-Theia]
|`eclipse/che-theia/latest`
| This is the default IDE that loads in a new workspace without this URL parameter.
endif::[]

| link:https://github.com/che-incubator/che-code[Che-Code]
| `che-incubator/che-code/insiders`
|

| link:https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/discover-intellij-idea.html[IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition]
| `che-incubator/intellij-community/latest`
|

| link:https://www.jetbrains.com/help/pycharm/quick-start-guide.html[PyCharm]
| `che-incubator/pycharm/latest`
|

|===

== URL parameter for starting duplicate workspaces

Visiting a URL for starting a new workspace results in a workspace that is based on a combination of a devfile and a linked Git repository.

> In some situations, you may need to have multiple workspaces that are duplicates in terms of the devfile and the linked Git repository. You can do this by visiting the same URL for starting a new workspace with a URL parameter. The URL parameter for starting a duplicate workspace is `new`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some situations, you may need to have multiple workspaces that are duplicates in terms of the devfile and the linked Git repository. You can do this by visiting the same URL for starting a new workspace with a URL parameter. 

The URL parameter for starting a duplicate workspace is `new`.
```

Author: Thank you, Rolfe. Fixed.

> The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `new` parameter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Is this sentence redundant with the one at the end of the previous paragraph? Maybe keep one and delete the other? When I see both, I start rereading  and comparing them repeatedly to figure out what the differences might be and understand why they're both here.

Author: I understand your concern here. For me, the first sentence says what the parameter is, and the second sentence shows how the parameter is used in the URL. I'm using both sentences for each parameter, as it seems to me that I can't drop either sentence without missing out basic information as a result. I could merge these two sentences into one, but that would result in a long sentence with the same meaning.

Reviewer 2: +1 to what Rolfe said. The sentence is redundant. Omitting it will not make the doc unclear.

Author: Let me have a second look. I can use the first sentence with the block of the second sentence.

Author: Like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/78564304/162475704-de65d6fb-a42e-4480-9331-3e969c3728e5.png)

:description: Optional parameters for the URLs for starting a new workspace
:keywords: url, urls, parameter, parameters, starting, start, workspace, workspaces, url-parameter, url-parameters, multiple-url-parameters, combine-url-parameters, several-url-parameters, add-url-parameters, concatenate, concatenate-multiple-URL-parameters, concatenate-URL-parameters, concatenating, concatenating-multiple-URL-parameters, concatenating-URL-parameters, concatenation, start-duplicate-workspaces, start-duplicated-workspaces, duplicate-workspace, duplicate-workspaces, duplicated-workspace, duplicated-workspaces, how-to-start-a-duplicate, how-to-start-duplicate, devfile, override-devfile-file-name, override-file-name, file-name, devfile-name, different-devfile-name, file-path, devfile-path, devfile-file-path, devfile-path-parameter, devfile-file-path-parameterdevfile, file-path, devfile-path, devfile-file-path, devfile-path-parameter, devfile-file-path-parameter
:navtitle: Optional parameters for the URLs for starting a new workspace
// :page-aliases:

[id="parameters-for-the-urls-for-starting-a-new-workspace_{context}"]
= Optional parameters for the URLs for starting a new workspace

> For the URLs for starting a new workspace, the following optional parameters provide an extra layer of basic workspace configuration in addition to the devfile.

Reviewer: This is good traditional tech writing. However, our updated style guidelines ask us to rephrase things in terms of users and their goals. For example, in that case, you could rephrase this as:
```suggestion
When you start a workspace, {prod-short} relies on the devfile for its configuration settings. If you use a URL to start a new workspace, you can append optional parameters to the URL that further configure the workspace. You can use these  parameters to specify a workspace IDE, start duplicate workspaces, and specify a devfile file name or path.
```
If users always use a URL to start a workspace, you could cut "If you use a URL to start a new workspace," from the above suggestion.

Reviewer: I think the following sentence lets the reader quickly grasp whether the topic helps them, especially if it shows up in the search results. "You can use these  parameters to specify a workspace IDE, start duplicate workspaces, and specify a devfile file name or path."

Author: Thanks, Rolfe. I used your suggestion and made some adjustments to it:
```suggestion
When you start a workspace, {prod-short} configures the workspace according to the instructions in the devfile. When you use a URL to start a new workspace, you can append optional parameters to the URL that further configure the workspace. You can use these parameters to specify a workspace IDE, start duplicate workspaces, and specify a devfile file name or path.
```

//here link to a section about the devfile. max-cx

== URL parameter concatenation

The URL for starting a new workspace supports concatenation of multiple URL parameters by using `&` with the following URL syntax:
[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{prod-url}#__<git_repository_url>__?__<url_parameter_1>__&__<url_parameter_2>__&__<url_parameter_3>__
----

== URL parameter for the workspace IDE

Che-Theia is currently the default integrated development environment (IDE) that a workspace loads with if no IDE is specified as a URL parameter as part of the URL for starting a new workspace.

The URL parameter for specifying another supported IDE is `che-editor=__<editor_key>__`.

The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `che-editor=__<editor_key>__` parameter:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{prod-url}#__<git_repository_url>__?che-editor=__<editor_key>__
----

.`__<editor_key>__` values for supported IDEs
|===
| IDE | `__<editor_key>__` value | Note

ifeval::["{project-context}" == "che"]
| link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-theia[Che-Theia]
| `eclipse/che-theia/latest`

> | This is the default IDE with link:https://github.com/che-incubator/chectl/[chectl stable]. This IDE loads in a new workspace without entering this URL parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| This is the default IDE that loads in a new link:https://github.com/che-incubator/chectl/[chectl stable] workspace.
```
If you think readers might be confused, you can further re-enforce the point by adding "You do not need to specify it by using a URL parameter."

Author: @rolfedh, I rewrote the content in this column as follows:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/78564304/161952063-d344232e-617f-424a-9e80-90e6543a72c3.png)

| link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-theia[Che-Theia]
| `eclipse/che-theia/next`

> | This is the default IDE with link:https://github.com/che-incubator/chectl/[chectl next]. This IDE loads in a new workspace without entering this URL parameter.

Reviewer: Same here.

endif::[]

ifeval::["{project-context}" == "crw"]
| link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-theia[Che-Theia]
|`eclipse/che-theia/latest`

> | This is the default IDE: it loads in a new workspace without this URL parameter.

Reviewer: Same here.

Author: Fixed. Thank you.

Author: I rewrote it as follows:
```suggestion
| This is the default IDE that loads in a new workspace without this URL parameter.
```

endif::[]

> | link:https://coder.com/docs/code-server/[*code-server*]

Reviewer 3: the correct link is https://github.com/che-incubator/che-code

Author: :) Thank you! Replaced.

| `che-incubator/che-code/insiders`
|

| link:https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/discover-intellij-idea.html[*IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition*]
| `che-incubator/intellij-community/latest`
|

| link:https://www.jetbrains.com/help/pycharm/quick-start-guide.html[*PyCharm*]
| `che-incubator/pycharm/latest`
|

|===

== URL parameter for starting duplicate workspaces

Visiting a URL for starting a new workspace results in a workspace that is based on a combination of a devfile and a linked Git repository.

> In some situations, you may need to start one or more workspaces from the same URL for starting a new workspace, resulting in workspaces that are duplicates in terms of the same devfile and the same linked Git repository. The URL parameter for starting a duplicate workspace is `new`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some situations, you may need to start one or more workspaces from the same URL for starting a new workspace. The resulting workspaces have duplicate devfiles and the same linked Git repository.
```

Reviewer 3: The definition is duplicated but the instances are different (they have their own states)

Author: @rolfedh, I rewrote this paragraph:
```suggestion
In some situations, you may need to have multiple workspaces that are duplicates in terms of the devfile and the linked Git repository. You can do this by visiting the same URL for starting a new workspace with a URL parameter. The URL parameter for starting a duplicate workspace is `new`.
```

The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `new` parameter:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{prod-url}#__<git_repository_url>__?new
----

> NOTE: Attempting to reuse the devfile and linked Git repository without the `new` URL parameter to start a new workspace in addition to a workspace that already exists results in an error message.

Reviewer: Would this message be clearer if it was composed of two or three sentences?

Author: Whatever it takes, :) this sentence clearly needs reworking.

Author: @rolfedh, this is how I solved it:
```suggestion
NOTE: If you currently have a workspace that you started using a URL, then visiting the URL again without the `new` URL parameter results in an error message.
```

== URL parameter for the devfile file name

> When you visit a URL for starting a new workspace, {prod-short} searches the linked Git repository for a devfile with the file name `.devfile.yaml` or `devfile.yaml`. So the devfile in the linked Git repository must follow this convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you visit a URL for starting a new workspace, {prod-short} searches the linked Git repository for a devfile with the file name `.devfile.yaml` or `devfile.yaml`. The devfile in the linked Git repository must follow this naming convention.
```

Reviewer: It's unclear whether the requirement is that:
- You MUST have a file with one of these filenames AND you can specify an alternate filename. 
- You MUST have a file with one of these filenames OR you can specify an alternate filename. 

The current phrasing makes me think the requirement is AND.

Reviewer 3: it's possible to not use the default name (.devfile.yaml or devfile.yaml) but in that case, you're forced to specify the path to the devfile on every workspace URL link (using ? devfilePath.... parameter)

Reviewer: @benoitf What happens if you have the default name (.devfile.yaml or devfile.yaml)  AND you specify the path to a different devfile? In that case, does the specified devfile override the default?

Author: @rolfedh, I've rewritten this paragraph as follows:
 ```suggestion
When you visit a URL for starting a new workspace, {prod-short} searches the linked Git repository for a devfile with the file name `.devfile.yaml` or `devfile.yaml`. The devfile in the linked Git repository must follow this file-naming convention.
```

In some situations, you may need to specify a different, unconventional file name for the devfile. The URL parameter for specifying an unconventional file name of the devfile is `df=__<filename>__.yaml`.

The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `df=__<filename>__.yaml` parameter:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{prod-url}#__<git_repository_url>__?df=__<filename>__.yaml <1>
----
<1> `__<filename>__.yaml` is an unconventional file name of the devfile in the linked Git repository.

TIP: The `df=__<filename>__.yaml` parameter also has a long version: `devfilePath=__<filename>__.yaml`.

== URL parameter for the devfile file path

When you visit a URL for starting a new workspace, {prod-short} searches the root directory of the linked Git repository for a devfile (with the file name `.devfile.yaml` or `devfile.yaml`). So the file path of the devfile in the linked Git repository must follow this convention.

> In some situations, you may need to specify a different, unconventional file path for the devfile in the linked Git repository. The URL parameter for specifying an unconventional file path of the devfile is `devfilePath=__<relative_file_path>__`.

Reviewer: Similar changes here.

Reviewer 3: the main usecase is to have both a devfile V1 and a devfile v2 in a repository but now with the automatic conversion of v1 to v2 or v2 to v1 the need is less important

:navtitle: Optional parameters for the URLs for starting a new workspace
// :page-aliases:

[id="parameters-for-the-urls-for-starting-a-new-workspace_{context}"]
= Optional parameters for the URLs for starting a new workspace

When you start a workspace, {prod-short} configures the workspace according to the instructions in the devfile. When you use a URL to start a new workspace, you can append optional parameters to the URL that further configure the workspace. You can use these parameters to specify a workspace IDE, start duplicate workspaces, and specify a devfile file name or path.

== URL parameter concatenation

The URL for starting a new workspace supports concatenation of multiple URL parameters by using `&` with the following URL syntax:
[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__<git_repository_url>__?__<url_parameter_1>__&__<url_parameter_2>__&__<url_parameter_3>__
----

> .URL for starting a new workspace with the URL of a Git repository and optional URL parameters

Reviewer: Consider adding blank lines above lines 19 and 15 to visually separate the chunks of content for future writers.

====
The complete URL for the browser:

\https://codeready-codeready-workspaces-operator.apps.sandbox-m2.ll9k.p1.openshiftapps.com#https://github.com/che-samples/cpp-hello-world?new&che-editor=che-incubator/intellij-community/latest&devfilePath=tests/testdevfile.yaml

Explanation of the parts of the URL:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
\https://codeready-codeready-workspaces-operator.apps.sandbox-m2.ll9k.p1.openshiftapps.com <1>
#https://github.com/che-samples/cpp-hello-world <2>
?new&che-editor=che-incubator/intellij-community/latest&devfilePath=tests/testdevfile.yaml <3>
----
<1> The pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}] part of the URL.
<2> The URL of the Git repository to be cloned into the new workspace.

> <3> Concatenated optional URL parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> The concatenated optional URL parameters.
```

Author: Done.

endif::[]

ifeval::["{project-context}" == "che"]
`\https://che-openshift-operators.apps.ci-ln-yp1cppt-72292.origin-ci-int-gce.dev.rhcloud.com#https://github.com/che-samples/cpp-hello-world?new&che-editor=che-incubator/intellij-community/latest&devfilePath=tests/testdevfile.yaml`
endif::[]

Explanation of the parts of the URL:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
ifeval::["{project-context}" == "che"]
\https://che-openshift-operators.apps.ci-ln-yp1cppt-72292.origin-ci-int-gce.dev.rhcloud.com/ <1>
endif::[]
ifeval::["{project-context}" == "crw"]
\https://codeready-codeready-workspaces-operator.apps.sandbox-m2.ll9k.p1.openshiftapps.com <1>
endif::[]
#https://github.com/che-samples/cpp-hello-world <2>
?new&che-editor=che-incubator/intellij-community/latest&devfilePath=tests/testdevfile.yaml <3>
----
<1> The pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}] part of the URL.
<2> The URL of the Git repository to be cloned into the new workspace.
<3> The concatenated optional URL parameters.
====

== URL parameter for the workspace IDE

> Che-Theia is currently the default integrated development environment (IDE) that a workspace loads with if no IDE is specified as a URL parameter as part of the URL for starting a new workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Che-Theia is the default integrated development environment (IDE) that a workspace loads with if no IDE is specified as a URL parameter as part of the URL for starting a new workspace.
```

In some situations, you may need to have multiple workspaces that are duplicates in terms of the devfile and the linked Git repository. You can do this by visiting the same URL for starting a new workspace with a URL parameter.

The URL parameter for starting a duplicate workspace is `new`.

The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `new` parameter:

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__<git_repository_url>__?new
----

NOTE: If you currently have a workspace that you started using a URL, then visiting the URL again without the `new` URL parameter results in an error message.

== URL parameter for the devfile file name

When you visit a URL for starting a new workspace, {prod-short} searches the linked Git repository for a devfile with the file name `.devfile.yaml` or `devfile.yaml`. The devfile in the linked Git repository must follow this file-naming convention.

In some situations, you may need to specify a different, unconventional file name for the devfile. The URL parameter for specifying an unconventional file name of the devfile is `df=__<filename>__.yaml`.

> The URL for starting a new workspace has the following syntax with the `df=__<filename>__.yaml` parameter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
